The Standard Definition 
of the 
NIL Programming Language

NIL is a language for describing computer programs.

NIL syntax is described by the following grammar diagram.

List -> "(" Atoms ")"
Atoms -> Atoms Atoms | List | Symbol | " "

Where Symbol is any consecutive sequence not including "(", ")", and " ".

Additionally, the grammar is sensitive to the relative indentation of the source text.
A line break followed by one or more tabs will imply the contents of that line are nested within
a List.

The automatic nesting from indentation is decided by the following algorithm...

1. For each line, count the number of sequential horizontal tabs occurring at the start of the line.
2. Derive a set from the tab counts such that there are only unique counts excluding tab counts of zero.
3. Derive a mapping from sequential numbers to counts such that the lowest count corresponds to 1 and 
   the highest count corresponds to the cardinality of the set. This numbering is referred to as the
   "nesting". Each line will have a "nesting" which its tab count will correspond to.
4. Iterate through the lines of text applying the following transformations...
  a. Obtain a difference by subtracting the nesting of the previous line from the nesting of the 
     current line.
  b. If the nesting difference is greater than zero, prepend a number of opening parentheses 
     equivalent to the difference to the beginning of the current line.
     Alternatively, if the nesting difference is less than zero, append a number of closing 
     parentheses equivalent to the difference to the end of the previous line.
     Otherwise, when there is no difference, append a closing parenthese to the end of the previous 
     line and prepend an opening parenthese to the beginning of the current line.
5. Append a number of closing parentheses to the last line equivalent to the absolute value of the 
   nesting of the last line.
6. Enclose the entire text in a nested pair of parenthese such that the entire text constitutes a 
   List.

As a demonstration of this grammar and indentation, regard the following indented text...

a
🅃 🅃 🅃 🅃 🅃 🅃 🅃 b
🅃 🅃 c
🅃 🅃 d (e 
🅃 🅃 🅃 🅃 f    g
  h)
🅃 🅃 🅃 🅃 i
🅃 j

which can be transformed to the following text without tab indentation...

(a 
              ((((b)) 
    c)
    (d (e 
        (f g 
  h))
        (i))
  j))

This transformation is performed by taking the tab counts of the eight lines in the text.
0
7
2
2
3
0
3
1

Then obtaining the ordered set, {1, 2, 4, 7},
creating a mapping, {(1, 1), (2, 2), (4, 3), (7, 4)},
and walking each line.

When walking each line, the parentheses are inserted as such.
Line 1: no indentation
Line 2: 4 - 0 = 4, prefix "(((("
Line 3: 2 - 4 = -2, suffix "))" on Line 2
Line 4: 2 - 2 = 0, prefix of "(" and suffix of ")" on Line 3
Line 5: 3 - 2 = 1, prefix of "("
Line 6: continuation of Line 5
Line 7: 3 - 3 = 0, prefix of ")" and suffix of ")" on Line 6
Line 8: 1 - 3 = -2, suffix of "))" on Line 7

Line 8 is the last line, with a nesting of 1, so a suffix of ")" is appended.

Finally, the entire text is enclosed in a closed pair of parentheses.


NIL semantics rely on the composition of Lists and Symbols to represent the structure of programs.
Nesting Lists is used to imply semantic dependence and ordering of effects.
The NIL language is comprised of a number of specific combinations of Lists and Symbols which 
correspond to components of a complete program.
These combinations are referred to as primitive expressions.

The primitive expressions are Symbolic Definition, Modular Encapsulation, Data Declaration, 
Let Binding, Control Inversion, Function Application, Selective Evaluation, and Reflection.

Symbolic Definition provides the capability to abstract various things through naming.
There are two forms of symbolic definition, single and complex.
Both forms of symbolic definition are represented by a list beginning with the symbol, 'define.

Single symbolic definition associates a symbol with a choice of entities.
The list structure of single symbolic definition is given by this list,
(define name entities...)
Where "name" is a symbol which will represent the choice, and "entities" is one or more atoms.
Wherever "name" occurs in a program, it may be replaced with one of the entities given.
For example, given (define a 'x 'y), and a function ((x 'y) -> x), the program (((x 'y) -> x) a)
results in 'y being chosen and the symbol "a" being replaced with it.

Complex symbolic definition creates an association between certain pairs of list structures.
The list structure of complex symbolic definition is given by this list,
(define (keywords...) associations...)
where "keywords" is a list of symbols and "associations" is an even numbered list of lists.
Each association is formed from two lists, the first list matches certain structural patterns, and 
the second applies a structural transformation to any list matching the pattern of the first list.
An example of complex symbolic definition is as follows,
(define (n) (n x) (' m ''x))


