What is Nil?
Nil is a small language for programming in the large.
What does this mean?
This means it has flexible abstractions for making small programs at any level of
abstraction.

There are some programs that have fixed behavior and comsume a predictable
amount of resources.
There are other programs that comsume an unpredictable amount of resources and
can change their behavior arbitrarily.
Compare the shell utility "ls" to a video game engine.
ls does a single thing and requires exactly enough time and space to feed a
directory listing to the standard output.
A video game engine combines arbitrary media formats to form composite digital
scenes which may react to user input.
Some of these scenes may be pre-scripted, or some of them may result from
arbitrarily complex, multi-state interactions between game entites and mechanics.
Compared to "ls", a video game engine is a program that requires an unpredictable
and highly dynamic amount of resources at any given time.
Nil is capable of expressing both "ls" and a video game engine.


You can write compute kernels for restricted systems but you can also write
high level application logic for managing and dispatching components.
The runtime supports both small restricted programs and large programs which
manage lots of moving parts and dynamic resource consumption.


Is it a shell, an extension language, an IDE, an EMACS, a JS?
It's a language for shipping software.
It's a shell language that you can use to describe large and small programming

How does my IR work?
It's sexpr based, but in a flat array.
I want to have functions similarly to how WASM works, but I also need to have
access to the program stack so I can manipulate where functions are called.
That might just be a frame pointer.

The IR should be a typed reduction of Nil.
It should have all the same capabilities of LLVM but be truly architecture
agnostic.
MLIR is dumb, don't copy it.
I need to be able to talk about the function frame.
That should just be the frame.
That lets me swap around.
What are my registers then?

You have functions.
Functions replace clobber themselves with a return value.
how do I claim more space on the stack?
I push bytes onto the frame.
I can only push functions onto the frame.
This doesn't help me if I want to clobber the frame. 
How would I extend a string?


(module 
 mystring (bytes "Hello World")
 string-append (function ())
)

(module ... )                          defines a binary object
(function () () ...)                   defines a "basic block"
(do )                                  jump to a label inside the function
(call )                                move control to a function
(set _ _)                              set a value at a label or address
(get _)                                load a value from a label
(grab _ _)                             load a value of some size from a label or
                                       address
(@ _)                                  address of a label
(push _)                               extend the top of the stack by alignment
(# _)                                  gets the size in bytes of something
+ - * / // % %%                        add subtract multiply divide and 
                                       signed divide
and or not xor                         binary logic operators
shiftup shiftdown pushdown             shift operations
(grow _ _)                             appease the type checker that your data
                                       is a different size now
(if _ _ _ _ _)                         compares the values at two labels or
                                       addresses and executes the second to 
                                       last expression if true, or the last
                                       expression if false
(grow _ _)                             zero extends a value by a number of bytes
(extend _ _)                           sign extends a value by a number of bytes

Do I even need modules?
This is just a temporary thingy for compiling.
I really don't need it for anything else.
Honestly this should just be how my interpreter bootstraps itself.
I should really really just have an interpreter that runs on the standard
library
in fact, that's what I'll do.




How is my interpreter structured?
I have basic functions which you use to implement the session.
But the user also has to implement how programs are sent and received.
That should just be an "in" and "out" function with strings.
I also need "claim" and "release" in order for the interpreter to grab memory.
Everything else can run off of that.
The interpreter itself can run off of claiming and releasing memory segments.

What's my philosophy?
Is my language a shell?
Is it a notebook?
Is it a REPL?
Is it an IDE?
How is my language useful outside of being a language?
It's not.
The point of it being useful is for using the language.
If you're not using the language, what are you even doing?
It might be nice to allow it to work as a shell though.




How do I collect something like this?
(define f (x -> (do (g x)(+ 1 1))))
(define g (x -> (do (h x)(+ 1 1))))
(define h (x -> (let (str (String (read))) (x _ 1 str))))
(define my-list (list 1))
(f my-list)
This is hard because now "localstring" is owned by somebody very low on the stack
and the string is physically very high up the stack, three activation records in.


(define f (x -> (g x)))
(define g (x -> (h x)))
(define h (x -> (let (str "localstring") (set x str))))
(define my-ref (foo 1))
(f my-ref)
In this example, I'm mutating indirection arbitrarily deep in the call stack with something
at the top.
Tail call optimization makes this okay.
However what about
(define f (x -> (do (g x) (+ 1 1))))
(define g (x -> (do (h x) (+ 2 2))))
(define h (x -> (let (str "localstring") (set x str))))
(define my-ref (foo 1))
(f my-ref)
This should be fine though because flow-typing enforces that the string escapes.
Thsi is kind of a worst-case scenario though because now I'm stuck relocating
this string for every function return.
This is where a heap would be good because the string really needs to be in
it's own space.
Having a heap isn't necessarily wrong, it's just that it's not always available.
Should I have memory profiles?
Stack vs. Stack+Heap vs. StackfulHeap?
Basically the program should dynamically react to the space that it's given.
The heap isn't bad, it's just that I don't want to be stuck going through the
heap for everything.
Should there be overridable capabilities in default?
Constructors create everything on the stack but there's no reason they can't
construct elsewhere while retaining the correct semantics of the program.
So there should be a module for this.
What should be my module for how to manage memory?
Should I be able to override constructors?
I shouldn't have to override the entire language.
What I need is a global store.
Escape analysis is better, but I'm building up a huge context of stuff that I
have to relocate on every function return which is bad.
I can perform whole program optimization but it's probably easier to just have
a heap that can store stuff so that functions can pass around ownership.
It's just nice to not have to require a heap for most things.



because I have a single, inconsistent universe, univalence is probably unnessecary.
What I do need is a way to establish equalities beyond the implicit ones.
How would I even do that?
When would I need it?
I would need it for verifying that a program is sound.
Based on an equivalence relation, I can elide certain disqualifications.

Do I make a distinction between (Number) and (1)?
How about (Function) and ((Number) -> Number) and (x -> x + 1)?
These are partial information structures.

(define (Function Parameters Result Body))


How do I crash my stack model?
(define mystring "foo")
(define f (x -> (do (g x) (1 + 1))))
(define g (x -> (do (h x) (1 + 1))))
(define h (x -> (do (x _ 1 <- "bar"))))
(f mystring)

Why do I even want a stack-only model?
Because it makes it very fast to use certain things.
Everything can be immutable and pass by reference.
Continuations allow you to "resize" data and then continue as you were.

Do I have numbers?
Yes, I have symbolic numbers.
Signed byte encoding.
The first byte is the least significant so you can work in order of long algebra.
The first byte also has the sign bit.

I need a way to do slices.
Slices are an important form of indirection.
They're different than array indexing.
I can use ranges.
Ranges are useful.
I should provide some machine types for all this stuff.
It's not like 32 bit architecture isn't common.
Optimizing for embedded byte-based architectures is honestly really stupid.
More like that would be a special limited application of this langauge.
Those architectures aren't general purpose.

How do I reason about types of things?
Like first class functions and modules?
Those are opaque.
viewtypes are for turning normal stuff into ADT's.
Specifically it's to destructure an ADT.
That's just the most stupid thing ever.
They're just functions.


What can I do with my GADT's.
I can have transform constructors.
What about performing transforms in-place?
That should be fine.
There's ways to do it without a heap.

How do I have seamless opt-in heap when everything's supposed to be allocated on
the stack?
Effects.
Effects are dependency injection.
Run some code with effect handlers that allocate to the stack.
What are those handlers?
What are the default methods.
Do I have a prelude like Haskell?
Do I have to use typeclasses? ew.
I need to be able to express a malloc.
How do I reason about casting and the fact that "everything is a byte"?

Dependency injection.
Just like how there's profiles in Ada, there's effects which decide how things are
accomplished in a language.
That actually is a nice way to reason about the interpreter and compilation
because effects map to what the compiler needs to emit.

What are my primitive effects?
create      ...       reserve storage to contain a new entity
discard     ...       release storage when an entity is no longer needed
apply       ...       activate a function
yield       ...       exit a function activation
access      ...       observe an entity in storage
store       ...       update an entity in storage
read        ...       get a program as input



What are my syntax functions?

'foo a symbol value
(' foo) a quoted expression
(' ('' foo)) insert the value of foo
(' (''' foo)) insert the items of foo at that position.
You can only use these constructively.
In addition you can use sequence primitives.
...whatever those are


In a batch compiler, you read in a bunch of crap and then spit out all the
errors all at once.
In Nil, you're only dealing with one snippet at a time.
This means that errors can be annotated dynamically as the user types.
For example, a type mismatch can be communicated by flagging the expression once
it's been closed.
Lets say I do something like 
(define (the (foo bar) baz)
 (function (x) ...))
The editor will automatically fill out what needs to be present in the body 
of the function.
(...
 (function (x) (do a b c)))
Macros can also communicate errors.
What are my errors?
* Missing expression.
* Type mismatch.
* Syntax mismatch.

What questions can I ask about a program?
* Result type
* Control flow
* Effects
* Structural supertype

How do I merge parsing macros and template macros?
Allow functions of ((Program) -> Program) to be run on capture fragments.
Lets say I have a loop macro like 
((syntax loop-utility (loop) 
 (loop x) ((''' (foo x))))
 where (foo (function (x) ...)))

(let (foo (function (x) ...))
 (syntax loop-utility (loop)
  (loop list) ((''' (foo list)))))

That should work.
Template works as an implicit quote.
Each capture variable is implicitly a (''' x)

How does my repl work?
You type a snippet using a mixture of parentheses and indentation.
As you type an expression, the REPL will search for partial syntax matches and 
suggest completions to you.
If you type something that doesn't match any syntax, you get an error that 
there's no match.
If you type a partial syntax and then fail to complete it, the macro will issue
a partial match error and suggest corrections.
The REPL will always stub out the types that are required at certain positions.


What are my basic types?

String
UTF-8 encoded bytes.

Bit array for machine types.

Numbers are ranges.
You can even give significant figures such as -100.0000 -- 100.00
You can use a carrier such as a specific bit array or a Natural number.
For example, 
(define Natural-10k (range of (bits 16) from 1 to 100))
(define foo 1)
(define foo (function (x) (x + 1)))
(define (foo x y z))
(define (foo (x : Natural) (y : Natural) (z : Natural)))
(foo 1 2 3)
Arbitrary precision is as follows...
Digits are encoded as binary octets.
The most significant bit is 1 if the following bytes is a digit.
The 7 least significant bits are a base-128 encoded digit.

What goes on the stack vs. the heap?
Containers.
You have various organizations of indexed mutable slots.


Even if I dont' have in-place constructors, I can still have codata constructors.

(define (foo x)
 (bar x)
 (baz x)
 (switch (bar x) → (baz x)))

Now I can do stuff like
(let (x (bar 1))
 (switch x))





how does format work?

(format foo) => "foo"
(format foo bar) => "foo bar"

(format Hello, World!) => "Hello, World! \n"
(format Hello, World! (break))

how do I manage macro characters?
Lisp manages them by having a macro character table.
Not sure if I want a macro character though.
That helps with parsing text and fancy text layout, however I want a 
transmission format rather than a fancy mutable parser.
The implementation will supply the logic for reading in.
I don't have macro characters because that enforces a specific way of reading
source text in.
What about macro characters though?

(define mod (module 
 (syntax foo f))
Do I specify a unicode character or just a glyph?
What if I want to parse things based on a newline?
I think the best thing would be to overload (read).
This should be specified in an addendum module. There should be a "REPL" or 
"Session" module?

What functions do I have over programs?
is syntax a function?
Nope.
What can I actually do with a program?
Match on symbols.
Symbols are constant values.
Expressions are tuples.
Can I convert an expression into a tuple, or is an expression just a tuple?
What is a program type if not a list?
A program is simply just a list.
(' a b c)
(list 'a 'b 'c)
these are the same.

making a list of things should be fine.
What's my actual list syntax?
({ a b c })
({ a b c })


What are my single character constructors?

!
@
#
$
%
^
&
*
~
,
.
{ }
[ ]
|
\
/

list
array


How do I do parsing macros?
I don't really care that there's a character string, that's assumed.
What I do care about is how parsers work together, or how you can hook your
parser into other code.
Probably through a "read" function.
More like a parse function though.
What should be part of the base language though?
Parsing or just syntax macros?
What comes in the default?
Do I enforce a live session in the default?
What's the signature of a parser function?
There is no signature.
Actually there's only effects.
There's (read) (get) (peek) as effects defined specifically for functions.



What's my shorthand for effects?

(define x 1)
(define (f x) (x + 1))
(data (f x)
(define f (x → foo (x + 1)))

(function (x) (effect) (x + 1))

WASM is dumb. 
What's my IR?
I shouldn't have to deal with integer sizes.
Make them be ranges.
Or bit vectors.
Declare the types as part of the module.

It also has effects.

It also has tail calls.

data is defined in terms of frames (basically a closure)
A frame is a giant struct which you index into programmatically.
Frames are doubly linked so you can walk them.
Functions are not frames because functions are *over* state, not *with* state.

struct and array types are definable.

You have code, and you have frames.
Frames are completely static.
Frame types are structs with typed slots.
Frames are also doubly linked.

How do I do dynamically sized frames?
More frames?
Extension of a slot?
The only caveat is allocating a dynamically sized array.
You can always append a slot to a frame.
It's more expensive, but it's possible.
Frame extend with a single slot type.
It incurs a domain check, but then you're good to go.
You can have multiple stack spaces.

What about malloc?
That's array manipulation.
It's fine to just cast shit using raw pointers.

What are my datatypes?
- Variable width integers.
- Byte Ranges. (not bit ranges) ((You can declare arbitrary bit widths up to 128B)
Basically every ISA worth anything supports 8-bit bytes minimally.
As long as I can frame everything in bytes, we're good.


You declare a module with a number of abstract frame types.
You also declare a bunch of named segments of instructions.
You can also declare a packed type.
If you can vectorize it, it's by accident.
If the target has SIMD then it will try its best to use it.

There's a text version and a binary version.
The binary version is smaller but that's it.

(module name [links] [optional entry point] [definitions])
(frame {slot list})
(array [domain] [length])
(struct {slot list})
(ref [type])
(function ({parameter types})
(label [name] {instruction list})

Operations are threaded, that is given a sequence of instructions, there's an
implicit single store.
All chains begin with a load and end with a store.
Chains are framed as memory-to-memory.

Floating point is standardized and should be fine to employ.
32b and 64b floating point should be fine.

What are my operations?

(load [slot])
(store [slot] [data])
(imm [value])
(fun [src])
(let [label] {[name] [src]} [body])

(sze [type])
(cvt [src] [type])

(call [function] {params})
(jmp [label])

operations on all numeric types
(add {src})
(sub {src})
(mul {src})
(div [src] [src])
(rem [src] [src])

operations on floating point
(abs [src])
(neg [src])
(cel [src])
(flr [src])
(tnc [src])
(rnd [src])

bitwise integer operations
(shl [src] [src])
(shr [src] [src])
(rtl [src] [src])
(rtr [src] [src])
(clz [src]) count leading zeros
(ctz [src]) count trailing zeros

boolean operations
(or [src] [src])
(xor [src] [src])
(and [src] [src])
(not [src])


How to secure function pointers without tables?
I need to make sure that if I'm calling an address, it's a function address.
This is trivial if I'm calling a label by name, or calling a stored label.
This is non-trivial if I'm reaching into memory and converting a random
reference to a function pointer.
Honestly, any model of secured function pointers is fine as long as you can't
take a function pointer from external memory.
An outside actor can't hand me a function table referring to things inside my
process.


It should be impossible by construction to call a function reference which does
not originate from a function label.
Threaded operation helps because you can inspect the dataflow from beginning to
end.
I still do want first class labels though for branching at runtime.
You have to declare an array with either a function type or a label type.
Labels must be either function references or instruction references.
How do I make sure that the table I'm using holds "relevant" labels to the
current function?
Each function has an implicit tabel containing all the labels.
Just jump according to which one.
You don't necessarily have to make a specialized array up front.
How do I prevent accessing a function from random memory?
Frames.
How do you know which frame is which?
Actually, what I need is delimited continuations.
Those should be a primitive, which lets me do anything else.
Or a function reference is null by default until it's set with a specific
instruction which refers to a label or copies a ref from another reliable
source.
Setting the initial value solves half the problem.
Protecting secure provenance is the other half.
Functions are frames.
They have local parameters which are statically declared.
Stack walking is outside the scope.
I need continuations which are just function closures.

Do I really REALLY need to avoid calling functions?
Like what can actually corrupt a runtime that you can't call out of.
WASM doesn't have an inline ASM format.
The worst that could happen is you call the wrong function.
Buffer overflows are worse.
So you can call a function that's not a function.
What would that even look like?
You can't call into the data segment.
Checking a function call is simple enough.
There should be an operation called function-from-ref that checks if the pointer
is valid according to the known labels.
Ugh, tables are still the most efficient way.
Although those are hard to make dynamically at runtime.

How do I make an allocator?
I have an array of memory.
I can subscript a type based on a byte index.
How would that look in practice?

A big part of heaps is that I need to have a concept of pointers.
Variables are pointers because everything is by-reference.
Memory is a pointer because there's no guarantee that it's located in a
predictable place.
You access it by yielding more pointers.
If I do something like
(define foo (storage 1024))
(define bar (foo 8 True)) "this is the same as (define bar True)"
Welp, now it's uninitialized.
Now I have to deal with default values.



System abstraction is weird.
You can either specify a standard abstraction, or you can make programs change
their behavior on each new operating system.
I think having a standardized abstract host is probably the best way to do this.
This is hard because I may want to abstract capabilities that a host doesn't have.
Well. A host can always have a subset of capabilities, but it's better to 
specify a bunch of them all at once.

My abstractions are Sockets, Streams, Pools, Containers

Abstractions are nice and make things convenient.
I can always export a limited module which doesn't use the the full context.

What's my philosophy here?
Should each vendor supply a runtime?
They do that anyways.
The vendor has their own runtime.
NIL should be able to use that runtime.
Cross compilation assumes knowledge of the runtime that you're targetting.
This is tricky because it potentially crosses implementations.
Implementations should be compatible.
Smalltalk environments are cool, but I don't want the language itself to be
inextricably grafted to a specific graphics library.
It might be better to have some primitives like the way low-level UI libraries 
do it.
If I was a "real" language, I'd just link to raylib.
Like how do I hook into stuff like Vulkan if I'm stuck with an already existing
GUI capability?
Wouldn't it be nice to use Vulkan or CUDA straight out of the box, or subsume 
pieces of the language to hook into those resources?
That's what the context is for.
Shadow some of the default functions.
My development UI should not be the same UI.
I can make a UI that's the same as my development UI and export the module 
that way.
How would I construct a system that uses other libraries?
Link to them?
How does smalltalk do it?

I don't want a bytecode interpreter.
I want a symbolic interpreter or just compile to machine code.
I'll have an FFI system.
I can also specify data layout in my lang so pointers and struct parameters are
easy enough.

How to reason about objects being printable and readable according to a 
cannonical form?
Regular Expressions.

I need a good FFI and an assembler.

What capabilities do I need for a compiler?
Image based development is cool and all, but at some point you're finished developing.
In Smalltalk, you have to go through this crazy process of deleting parts of your runtime.
Even then, you can't do this in a way that allows cross compilation.

What can C do?
C can link to libraries 
C can call OS DLL's (this is a coincidence since C is the vendor's supported language)
C can cross compile
C can express memory allocators as casting objects from a byte-array substrate.

What can NIL do?
NIL can link to libraries by emitting assembly.
NIL can call into OS libraries by emitting assembly.
NIL can call into the Linux kernel by emitting assembly that calls the correct syscall.
NIL can cross compile itself and its runtime.
NIL can express memory allocators as getting a page from memory and then storing a value in a portion of it.

So what do I actually need to do this?
Assembler, Linker, and filesystem access.
Trivial.
Do I need more than that?
Nope.
In fact, more than that would be weird and presumptive.
Debugging is the natural state of the program.
What's my FFI?
Is it a CFFI?
Do I have a way to emit assembly?
What I need is a way to differentiate between a string, byte string, and some code somewhere.
I need a good inline assembly interface.
What am I passing in, what am I getting out?
Where do I put it?
Well I can get storage information about all my types.

What's my numerical abstraction????
Byte, 
ByteWidth (Fixed Width Signed/Unsigned numbers by storage size),
Number (bigint)
Float/Double (standard types)
This should give you everything.

I want bytes because bytes are the storage medium.
I want byte-widths because I want to deal with fixed with signed/unsigned numbers with overflow.
I want bigints to deal with arbitrary precision.

how do I reason about parsing stuff from a string?
I want to maintain consistency between printing and reading objects.
There should be a single representation which is freely convertible between
strings and data.
Regular expressions should be part of this.
But full regular expressions are inadequate.
I need to reason about
1. The order of delimiter characters.
2. Ambiguity in parsing. (no lookahead should help with that)
3. Subpatterns.
4. Pattern Sequences
5. Recursive Patterns.

What I end up with is algebraic data representations.



How do I make syntax correspond to types?
Numbers and symbols have specific ways they're printed out.
It's all macro characters.

A string should be a string no matter what form.
That involves having reversible algorithms, or a pair of algorithms that are
guaranteed to have the same output.
This is worse than program equivalence.
How do you reverse a thing?

Lets say I made
(data (list x) empty (cons x (list x)))
which can make data as
(define l (cons 1 (cons 2 (cons 3 empty))))
But I wanted to make a special syntax to do the same thing,
[1 2 3]
How would I go between the two?


Read and format should be different.
What I want to reason about is how to create new structural syntax classes.
That's just more delimiters.
How do I declare that in a way which the reader and the frontend can be aware of?
eh, that's impossible.
Macro characters make that hard to use.
Maybe I shouldn't bother...
Having a fixed syntax, but flexible form makes for a better frontend experience.
Nobody's really complaining about making a language in a language anyways.


But here's the deal, how do I show expressions without visible parentheses?
I should have line breaks and tabs, but what else?

How do I do polymorphism?
Interfaces?
Datatypes?
Ad-Hoc polymorphism?
Typeclasses?
Polymorphism through modules?

I have datatype polymorphism.
A structure may encapsulate any instance as a slot.
Functions over that structure are implicitly over any slot type as well.

Then I have polymorphism like (format x) where x may be some type.

What if I want to abstract an array to be something specific like a sorted array.


(data (foo x)
 (bar x → (m x))
 (baz x → (n x)))


For starters, within a module you can just sum type everything.
You can constrain stuff by using abstract data.

(data (fooable x)
 (foo x → (foo x)))

(define (M : (fooable T)) T)
(define foo ((x t) → ...))


How do I make parsers the same as printers?
I need reversible functions.
How do I make reversible functions?
Make them total.
Is this even a useful property?
There may be data with no printable representation, or data that shouldn't be
read in.
What about secrets?
Secrets shouldn't be read in and they shouldn't be printed out.
There should be a way to overload stuff.
I should have character hooks which will engage parsers.
Parsers can issue errors.



vocab

atom    a single element in a list
form    a list which denotes evaluation
list    the data structure
type    a choice between some values


what's my base language?
special forms?


Define
(define _ ...)
  Define is used to establish symbolic bindings.
  Symbolic bindings are names of constant values, names of functions, and 
  names of polymorphic functions.

  The form which defines a constant is the keyword "define" followed by a 
  symbol which is used as the name, followed by a form which is evaluated to 
  obtain the value which the name binds.

  The form which defines a function is the keyword "define" followed by a 
  symbol which is used as the name, followed by a function definition which is 
  evaluated to obtain the function which the name binds.

  The form which defines a polymorhpic function is the keyword "define" 
  followed by a form which contains the function signature, followed by one or 
  more definitions.
  The signature is a single form where the first symbol represents the function 
  name, and the following symbols represent parameter names.
  The definition is a form containing two list atoms.
  The first contains a list of types which correspond to the list of parameters.
  The second contains a function body which is evaluated when the function 
  is called with those parameters.




What do I need to interpret?

"define" 
add a new binding to the current module

"data"
add a new data definition to the current module

"syntax"
add a new macro definition to the current module

"module"
evaluate and return a module definition

"function"
evaluate and return a function object

"list"
evaluate and return a list object

"?"
evaluate subject and conditionally evaluate subexpressions

