                         The Standard Definition of Nil

                                  Introduction
This document formally defines Nil with the purpose of facilitating the
portability of Nil programs across a variety of implementations and
environments.

Nil is a general purpose programming language. Programs are expressed in Nil as
the repeated application of functions over data such that transformations are
effected on that data.

Programs expressed in Nil are required to conform to a notion of correctness.
A correct program is guaranteed to never corrupt or degrade the form of the data
being transformed, or perform undesired transformations on that data.


			       Language Overview
The Nil programming language is comprised of modular but interdependent
abstractions which are composed to describe a complete and correct program.
These abstractions are as follows...
Programs
Modules
Functions
Data
Types
Effects
Sequences
Arithmetic of Values

                                    Programs
Programs in Nil are both a means of specifying transformations of data and a
form of data themselves. This is such that a Nil program may represent both the
transformations to be effected on data, and the data being transformed.

Programs as data are canonically represented as a string of characters. This
format can be considered the authoritative source of the form of a program. This
is referred to as a "written program".

Generally any character value can be used to write a program. This document
assumes that the Unicode is used to store and transmit written programs.

Programs are composed of two structural components, symbols and expressions.
A symbol is a sequence of printable characters which correspond to a unique
symbolic value.
An expression is a sequence of programs which corresponds to a composite
aspect of the program's meaning.

Written programs are composed according to a syntax which decides the 
permissible orderings of characters.
The syntax is as follows ...
1. An expression begins with an open brace, "(",
   and ends with a closed brace, ")".
2. A symbol is any unbroken sequence of non-blank characters,
   excluding "(" and ")".
The only invalid written program is one which does not contain evenly matched
pairs of round braces, which violates the first rule of Nil syntax.

                                    Modules
Modules provide a way to modularize large programs.
