Lisp has a cool quality where an object is printed in a way that can be read back in with the reader.
For example, in common lisp,

> (defparameter x (quote (foo bar baz)))
> (print x)
(quote (foo bar baz))

which is neato

Here's the issue though, this property is only informally maintained.
again, in common lisp, objects have no printable representation that's readable.
It's definitely weird.

I need a way to talk about how things are mapped to character strings.
In order for this to work, I need regular expressions.
F-strings may work.
Like being able to use recursive strings.
I also need context for certain things.

Actually, macro characters are a great way to do this.
You have a TON of options and macro characters are also syntax highlightable
(this means a frontend can easily highlight based on syntax regions)

How do I talk about my parser.

S expressions don't fit neatly into anything since symbols are delimited weirdly.

Like how do I make a regex for anything that's not a special character?
Via exclusion.

(form Program (repeats (some Symbol Expression String Quotation)))
(form Symbol (excludes Special Whitespace "(" ")") +)
(form Expression "(" (repeats Program (optional Whitespace)) ")")

(form Float (some "+" "-") Digits (optional (some "." "//") Digits))

(form Record "{" (repeat Symbol (optional ":" Symbol) "=" Program) "}")

(form Lambda "/" (capture Parameter Symbol) "." (capture Body Program))


I have a data type.
I have to attach some form to a data.

(form Symbol (capture (repeats (excludes Special Whitespace Punctuation))))

How do I get a number from a string though?
That's super important and also is not guaranteed.
This is guaranteed via the Number constructor though.

(form Number (capture Number (number (the String (repeats Digit)))))

So I do have dedicated parsers for raw jumbles of strings.

How does format use the pattern for a specific type?
It takes the data instance, and the form attached to it, and deconstructs the data fields into the string.

What about choices?
In float I can use either a slash or a period dot.
How do I reason about that?

I can't even hook this into a structural editor anyways.

Symbols and numbers are fundamental bits.
How do I parse other things though?
Are they all subsets of symbols and numbers?

What about binary?

(form Bits Number "0b" (repeat (some "0" "1")))
This tells you how to read it in, but this doesn't tell you how to ingest it
or how to print it back out.
This is weird because I don't need custom syntax for a structural editor.
I'm never ever deal with ingensting a text file.
Do I want to define new syntax inside the structural editor?
Nah, it's more about having some minimal punctuation for structured stuff.
Just like how you have paragraphs and sentences, you have expressions and atoms.
What about escape characters?
Backslash.

What I'm really missing is alternative delimiters.
That's how I can do other syntax.
It would be really nice to be able to use other delimiters.
How do I declare that?
Macros?

(syntax Foo (keywords) "foo" body "bar")

(syntax Foo (keywords) (foo bar baz) (stuff foo bar baz))

here's how I'd make a record

(syntax RecordConstructor (= ,)
 "{" field-list "}" (record '''(parse-field-list field-list)))

Yeah this should be fine.
