What access to I have to my underlying system?
If I have the ability to call any routine from the host API, then do I need
abstractions?
Yes, I need portable abstractions.
I especially need portable abstractions for things that NIL does innately.
Filesystem, Linking, Assembly, Memory, and Multithreading.

I have a process.
The process can spawn threads.
Threads are based on functions so they run until they return.
How do I deal with the return values?
They don't return.
What about a thread nursery?
Those also don't return.

Processes can spawn other processes.
This lets you do things like CD or use different permissions or whatever.

Filesystem:
I can open files, list directories, and pull file status (system dependent)

Linking:
I can pull in a library and I have a CFFI to call into it.

Assembly:
I can write inline assembler.

Memory:
I can claim memory and use views to store stuff into it.


Actually this is very very stupid.
Literally just do what you want.
If you have an assembler, proper CFFI, and the ability to load libraries, you can do anything in the system.
As long as you can speak the vendor language, you're good to go.


This doesn't do a lot for having a gread portable multithreading and graphics library but that's fine.

What I really need to worry about is if I can emit a bootstrapped executable.
This involves issuing the proper linking to system libraries.
You also need to be able to properly manage memory.


Philosophical issue:
I have language X, and System Y.
I would like to deploy an application written in X on Y.
The problem is that the System Y vendor only supports language Z.
You can write and compile programs in Z and they will run on Y.
There's two choices...
1. write an X implementation in Z.
2. cross compile an X implemetation by reverse-engineering the Z runtime.

The issue with 1 is that you have to keep re-implementing X in a new language
for each system you want to target, and you end up with multiple versions.

The issue with 2 is that the vendor can easily break compatability.

2 is still the best option because if you manage to make something that works
for a specific version, it will continue to work.
Vendors usually want to maintain some level of backwards compatability.

You can also create modules in the vendor language that supply more functionality
to the cross compiled bootstrap implementation.

Start with one system, make the bootstrap, make a portable implementation,
compile it to everywhere else.

Linux is the easiest to start with.
It runs on most systems and you can call into things easily by emitting assembly
and whatnot.

Actually it should be easier to abstract the system to a few things.

Sockets
Streams
Pools
Workers
Substrate

How do I use a better vocabulary for this?
I should use an analogy.
Like an engine?
No engine is wrong.
This is its own analogy.

Should I even acknowledge that there's a filesystem?
Nope, that's a socket type.


Sockets
        Stateful resource handles

Streams
        buffered, consumable input

Pools
        dynamic storage resources

Workers
        concurrent, sometimes parallel computing

Substrate
        host compatability, linking, assembler utility, calling native routines.


(define System
 (module
  (define Sockets       (module ...))
  (define Streams       (module ...))
  (define Pools         (module ...))
  (define Workers       (module ...))
  (define Substrate     (module ...))
))

I still need API's for this to work.
What are my APIs?
Also should I use functions or some other thing to make them all work?
